Cardigan Bay wasn't always an inland sea. Legend speaks of a rich and fertile land,
so fertile that one acre there was said to be worth four elsewhere. This land was called
Micegwydno, the land of Gwydno Garanhir, part of the kingdom of Merionydd. It stretched
some twenty miles west of the current shoreline. It was also known as Cantrer Gwaelod, the
lower hundredth, a hundredth being an early measurement of land, and lower referring to
the fact that it was land that lay beneath the level of the sea. It was protected by
a great wall that was punctuated at river mouths by sluice gates that would let tides
in and out of estuaries, but keep the encroaching sea from the fertile arable lands.
There are a number of versions of the story. It is first mentioned in the thirteenth century
book known as the Black Book of Cymardin. This is a collection of poems and much older material
relating to events that had taken place centuries before. Included is a poem called Bothi Micegwydno,
the drowning of Gwydno's land. It is one of the finest examples of medieval Welsh poetry.
Today, the Black Book of Cymardin is kept in the National Library of Wales in Aberystwyth,
along with many other ancient Welsh texts and contemporary collections of writing. It's
well worth a visit. There have been many versions of the story down the ages, but the most enduring
tells of how Saithenyn, the man responsible for maintaining the sea defences, fell in
love with Gwydnogarán hir's daughter Mereyrydd. At her wedding to another man, Saithenyn became
drunk and forgot to close the sea gates. When a storm whipped up, there was nobody
to raise the alarm. The sixteen villages of Cantergwaelod were swallowed whole by the
waves. Some say that Gwydnogarán and a few of his men made it to safety. One version
says that Saithenyn's seven sons devoted themselves to God in reparation for their
father's actions, one of those sons being St Tidner, one of our early Celtic saints.
The legend has inspired a number of poems and songs, including a well-known 19th century
air, the Bells of Aberdwyfi, which has become a standard amongst many Welsh choirs. When
the tide is low, very low, part of the ancient woodlands of Cantergwaelod can still be seen,
and locals will tell you that when a gale stirs far out in the Irish sea, the bells
of Cantergwaelod can be heard ringing in the tide, warning those on shore of the coming
storm.